367
Archeologia e Calcolatori
30, 2019, 367-385
GIS MAPPING OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
IN THE MOLISE REGION (ITALY)
1. Introduction
The Molise Region is in the northern sector of southern Italy and it is
spread from the Apennine chain to the Adriatic coast. This area experienced
human presence since prehistoric times, as it is testified by its rich archaeological
and architectural heritage (De Benedittis 1979; Coarelli, La Regina 1984)1
.
The oldest human presence in Molise is represented by the Upper Palaeolithic settlement of Isernia La Pineta, dated back at about 600.000 years
BP (Coltorti et al. 1982, 2005 and references; Peretto 2013). The site
represents a unique example in the history of the human frequentation in
Europe for the presence of a considerable number of paleontological finds
associated to lithic artefacts. Other more recent and relevant prehistoric sites
have been also found in the municipalities of Pescopennataro (Rio Verde site),
Carovilli (Piana S. Mauro and Fonte Curello sites), Rocchetta a Volturno
(Grotta Reali site), Civitanova del Sannio (Morricone del Pesco site), Cerro
al Volturno (Monte S. Croce site) and in the Biferno Valley (Barker 1995;
Grimaldi 2005; Minelli, Peretto 2006; Rufo et al. 2010; Rufo 2011).
After prehistoric times, the most relevant archaeological findings can
be chronologically dated to the Samnite Age (ranging from the V to the I
century BC). In this period, several villages and about thirty Samnite fortifications were built, the latter being in correspondence to some of the highest
topographic peaks of the Molise Region. These fortifications were built with
the technique of opera poligonalis and were connected to each other through
transhumance routes, the so called tratturi (AA.VV. 1980; Pellicano 2007;
Meini, Di Felice, Petrella 2018; Minotti et al. 2018). The remains of
Pietrabbondante (Fig. 1 A) (Capini, De Benedittis 2000; La Regina 2014),
the small temples of Vastogirardi (Morel 1984; Pagano, Ceccarelli,
D’Andrea 2005) and S. Giovanni in Galdo (Stek 2010), the fortifications
of Terravecchia di Sepino (Matteini Chiari, Gaggiotti, De Benedettis
1984) and Monte Vairano (De Benedittis 1974, 1988, 2004) are amazing
examples of the Samnites’ culture.
The Samnite Age ceased with the arrive of the Romans, who dominated
the entire region in the period between the I century BC and the V century AD.
1 For this kind of study, the bibliographic research just took into account the most relevant
and general papers and volumes published for each archaeological site, without considering the
large amount of papers regarding local and specific investigations.
368
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
Roman findings are evenly widespread in Molise, and the city of Saepinum (Fig.
1 B) is considered the symbol of the history of Roman civilization. Saepinum
was a Samnite commercial forum and service centre, then it became a Roman
municipium and, later, it was transformed into a medieval and modern rural village (Gaggiotti, Matteini Chiari 1979; De Benedittis 1981; Ceglia 2015).
Other examples of important Roman towns are Aesernia (Fig. 1 C) (Catalano,
Paone, Terzani 2001; Terzani 2005; Stek et al. 2015; Amato et al. 2016),
Venafrum (Capini 1990; Conventi 2004; Mataluna 2012), Bovianum (De
Benedittis 1977; Amato et al. 2013 and references) and Larinum (De Tata
1990; Di Niro 1991; Caliò, Lepone, Lippolis 2011; Lippolis et al. 2015).
Medieval findings include, among all, the monastery of San Vincenzo
al Volturno (Fig. 1 D) (Marazzi, Delogu 1996; Paone et al. 2004) and the
necropolis of Campochiaro (Ceglia 1988, 2000 and references; Ceglia,
Marchetta 2012), both testifying the early Medieval phase. The cathedrals
of Trivento, Guardialfiera, Termoli and Larino and the castles of Civitacampomarano, Roccamandolfi, Cerro al Volturno, Termoli, Venafro, Gambatesa
and Campobasso are also noteworthy evidences of Medieval Age, whose
stories and transformations represent important pages of the Molise history
(Marino, Carnevale, Pesino 2003; Di Rocco 2009).
In the last years, both the Superintendency for the Archaeological Heritage of the Molise Region and different national and international academic
teams carried out numerous archaeological excavations and explorations in
the entire Molise Region. As a result, some archaeological contexts can now
rely on a rich literature and updated results, whereas other areas still require
a detailed overall analysis and, especially, a systematic study. Moreover, many
archaeological materials derived from emergency excavations during either
public or private works are unstudied. In addition, there is a lack of an organic
and complete “reading” of all the known data and the concrete need to acquire
additional information on areas that have never been investigated to date.
In order to standardize and store the myriad of archaeological data from the
Molise Region, from 2013 until present, a fruitful collaboration between the
University of Molise, the Regional Directorate of Cultural Heritage of Molise
and the Administrative Division of Molise has led to undertake significant
actions of intervention for the knowledge and the preservation of the ancient
landscape, according to the following workflow:
– Census of all known archaeological findings of the Molise Region through
bibliographic analysis.
– Implementation, for the first time, of a detailed and updated archaeological
database.
– Integration of this database into a geographical information system by
using the software ArcMap 10.1 to apply spatial analysis techniques and to
derive thematic maps.
369
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
Fig. 1 – Some of the most relevant archaeological sites in the Molise Region. A) Remains of Pietrabbondante; B) The Roman town of Sepinum; C) Roman walls of Aesernia; D) Monastery of San
Vincenzo al Volturno.
– Generation of an updated computerized map of the archaeological evidences
of the study area as a product useful for the promotion of the archaeological
heritage and a tool for more suitable urban planning and project designs.
2. Material and methods
The work has been based on separate phases of investigation that include
the collection of archaeological data, the collection of topographic data, the
GIS database creation, and the GIS spatial analysis.
2.1 Collection of archaeological data
The collection of a large amount of data about archaeological sites within
the Molise Region has been carried out through a two steps research. In a first
phase of investigation, published detail scale archaeological researches carried
out by both local public authorities and single scientists have been analysed.
The archaeological maps realized in the municipalities of Venafro (Quilici,
370
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
Quilici Gigli 2011), Riccia, Oratino, Castropignano (De Benedittis 2008),
Bonefro, Casacalenda, Castellino del Biferno, Colletorto, Montelongo, Montorio
dei Frentani, Morrone del Sannio, Provvidenti, Ripabottoni, Rotello, S. Croce
di Magliano, S. Giuliano di Puglia, Ururi (Di Niro, Santone, Santoro 2010),
Isernia (Stek et al. 2015; Amato et al. 2016), Belmonte del Sannio, Agnone,
Capracotta, Vastogirardi, San Pietro Avellana (Sardella 2011) and Trivento
(Santorelli 2013) are good examples of exhaustive known data related to
detail scale archaeological surveys. The monographs of the hill-forts of the Samnites (Oakley 1995) and of the Palaeolithic sites in Molise (Grimaldi 2005)
gave also important overviews on the distribution of archaeological sites during
specific time span. The Atlas of Cultural Emergencies of Molise (Zilli 2010),
edited by University of Molise, has been also analysed; the latter represents,
up to now, the unique attempt to take a census of archaeological sites in the
Molise Region, resulting in the collection of 228 sites (124 classical sites, 73
industrial archaeological remnants, 31 sites belonging to various categories).
The combination of all the previously mentioned researches led us to
gather, in 2015, an unprecedented collection of archaeological data in the
frame of the project “Conoscere per Competere” supported by the Administrative Division of Molise. This project resulted in the collection of 905
archaeological sites in the entire region. In addition, 977 archaeological data
collected by Barker (1995) in the Biferno valley have been also added to our
database. As a result, 1882 archaeological sites have been collected during
this first step of the research.
In a second phase of investigation, the archives of the Archaeological
Superintendence have been analysed thanks to the collaboration with the
Regional Directorate of Cultural Heritage of Molise. Consequently, new and
inedited data from archaeological impact assessment reports (related to public or private works) and database regarding excavations, finds, monuments
and historical buildings have been acquired. The combination of these two
consecutive phases of investigation led us to collect 3111 archaeological sites
within the entire Molise Region.
2.2 Collection of topographic data
The collection of topographic data includes topographic maps both at
scale 1:5000 (Technical Map of the Molise Region) and 1:25.000 (I.G.M.
topographic maps) made available by the technical offices of the Molise Region. In addition, a 40 m DTM of the Molise Region has been used.
2.3 GIS database creation
All the collected archaeological sites have been listed in a point shapefile through the software ArcGIS 10.1 and then plotted on the previously
371
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
mentioned topographic maps and on the 40 m Molise DTM. The point
shapefile, named “archaeological sites”, includes several fields that have been
introduced to provide a complete and accurate description of every single site.
Moreover, fields have been named as follows (field type is in parentheses):
– Code (string, length 10) that includes three letters derived from the name of
the municipality where the site is located followed by a progressive number;
– Province (string, length 20), which is the administrative Province (either
Isernia or Campobasso) where archaeological sites fall within;
– Municipality (string, length 50), the name of the municipality where the
site is located;
– Locality (string, length 50) and Address (string, length 50), that provide
further information about site location;
– Reference system (string, length 20), that is the reference system used to
geolocate archaeological sites (UTM-WGS84);
– Z coord (double, precision 0, scale 0), that is the elevation above sea level
of every site;
– Point X (double, precision 0, scale 0) and Point Y (double, precision 0, scale
0) that represent longitude and latitude of the plotted sites respectively;
– Cartography (string, length 20) that is the type of topographic map used to locate the archaeological site (either 1:5000 or 1:25.000 scale topographic maps);
– Number cart. (string, length 20) that is the number of the used topographic
map;
– Georeferencing method (string, length 50), a brief description of the method used to locate every archaeological site, either by web research, satellite
images, topographic maps, field work or aerial photos;
– Georeference quality (string, length 20), which includes three possibilities,
approximate, good and certain, based on how much reliable the site location is;
– Research method (string, length 50), the research method used to recognize
every single site, including web research, bibliographic research and field work;
– Description (string, length 254), a first, brief description of the archaeological
sites, which have been subdivided in 19 classes;
– Definition (string, length 254) a brief, more detailed description of the sites;
– Description_1 to Description_5 (string, length 254), five fields used to
provide a very complete and detailed description of every archaeological site;
– Age_1 (string, length 254), a precise age of every site;
– Age_2 (string, length 254), ages grouped in the 11 age ranges proposed by
Barker (1995): Palaeolithic (older than 4500 BC), Neolithic (4500 BC-3000
BC), Eneolithic (3000 BC-2000 BC), Bronze Age (2000 BC-1000 BC), Iron Age
(1000 BC-500 BC), Samnite Age (500 BC-80 BC), Roman Age (80 BC-600
BC), Medieval Age (600 AD-1500 AD), Post-medieval Age (1500 AD-1800
AD), Recent Age (1800 AD-present).
372
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
– References (string, length 254), both paper and web references where every
single archaeological site has been derived from.
2.4 GIS spatial analysis
All the 3111 listed archaeological sites have been then analysed in a GIS
software to derive information about their spatial distribution. Moreover, in
order to quantify the areal distribution of the mapped sites, we performed a
density analysis trough the “Kernel Density” method of ArcGIS 10.1 by setting
the following parameters (unit measure is m): output cell size = 284 (which
is the default value); search radius = 1000; area units = square kilometres;
output values as = densities; method = planar.
Then, site distribution during different ages has been analysed by grouping all the archaeological sites in the age classes listed in the Age_2 field of
the “archaeological site” shapefile. Archaeological sites grouped for age have
been then plotted on the 40 m Molise DTM.
Furthermore, site elevation (expressed in meters above sea level) respect
the site age has been examined to verify a possible trend in sites distribution
through time. In this case, we have selected all archaeological sites with the
same age and exported them in a new point shapefile. We have then created a
box-plot graph through the “create graph” option within the table of attribute,
using site elevation as the value field.
Finally, the archaeological sites spatial distribution and its relationship
with some natural (rivers) and man-made (tratturi) features of the landscape
has been investigated. We created two polyline shapefiles for both the features
and we applied a buffer of 1000 m to both the “river” and the “tratturi”
shapefile. We have then clipped the “archaeological site” shapefile with this
buffer and we have extracted all the sites located within 1000 m from both
the river and the tratturi features.
3. Results
The spatial distribution of all the 3111 mapped archaeological sites of
the Molise Region is reported in Fig. 2. Moreover, archaeological sites have
been plotted on a 40 m DTM of the Molise Region together with a polyline
shapefile that includes the borders of all the municipalities of the Molise Region. Sites distribution enhances the occurrence of three main clusters located,
respectively, in the north-eastern, central and south-western sectors of the
region. The north-eastern cluster is NE-SW oriented and corresponds with
the Biferno river valley, being located between the municipalities of Petrella
Tifernina and Lucito, to the SW, and Termoli and Campomarino to the NE.
The central cluster is roughly N-S oriented, being limited by the municipality
of Castropignano and Torella del Sannio to the N and of Bojano, San Polo
373
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
Matese and Campochiaro to the S. The SW cluster is NE-SW oriented and it
is limited by the town of Isernia to the NE and the municipality of Venafro
to the SW.
Among the entire Molise Region, the Larino municipality has the
largest number of archaeological sites within its territory, with 277 mapped
sites (Fig. 3a). It is followed by Casacalenda (186 sites, Fig. 3b), Isernia (167
sites, Fig. 4a), Guglionesi (162 sites, Fig. 4b), Trivento (106 sites, Fig. 5a) and
Campomarino (102 sites, Fig. 5b), that are the only municipalities with more
than 100 archaeological sites.
Other municipalities with a relevant number of archaeological sites are
Venafro (98 sites), Agnone (66 sites), Termoli (65 sites), Castropignano (61
sites), Baranello (53 sites), Macchia Valfortore (49 sites), Colle D’Anchise
and Guardialfiera (46 sites), Vinchiaturo (44 sites), Morrone del Sannio (43
sites), San Martino in Pensilis (38 sites), Petrella Tifernina (36 sites), Colli al
Volturno and Oratino (35 sites), and Bojano and Pietrabbondante (30 sites).
The remaining municipalities have a few archaeological sites never exceeding
30. It is worthy to note that Campobasso, that is the administrative centre of
the Molise Region and the most populated town of the entire region (49320
inhabitants), is characterized by the occurrence of only 6 archaeological sites.
Fig. 2 – Spatial distribution of the mapped archaeological sites, plotted on a 40 m
DTM of the Molise Region. Black dots indicate the archaeological sites whereas
black lines indicate the borders of all the municipalities of the Molise Region.
374
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
Fig. 3 – Map of the archaeological sites for all the municipalities
with more than 100 mapped sites. A = Larino; B = Casacalenda.
Archaeological sites have been classified according to site typology
of the “description” field of the “archaeological site” shapefiles (see
Material and Methods section for detail).
The Kernel density method allows us to quantify the number of archaeological sites for square-kilometre (Fig. 6). The analysis confirms the
occurrence of the above described three main clusters with the highest density
value occurring around Isernia, where a value of about 82 sites/km² has been
obtained. In addition, maximum site density values of 21 sites/km² and 12
sites/km² have been obtained, respectively, for the NE-SW trending cluster
(that corresponds to the Biferno river valley) and for the N-S trending cluster
located in the central sector of the Molise Region. Furthermore, the analysis
375
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
Fig. 4 – Map of the archaeological sites for all the municipalities with
more than 100 mapped sites. A = Isernia; B = Guglionesi. Archaeological sites have been classified according to site typology of the
“description” field of the “archaeological site” shapefiles (see Material
and Methods section for detail).
enhances the occurrence of other local high-density values. The latter are in
the central-northern and in the eastern sectors of the Molise Region, corresponding to the municipalities of Trivento and Macchia Valfortore respectively.
Moreover, a value of 50 sites/km² has been obtained for the Trivento cluster
whereas a value of about 15 sites/km² has been obtained for the Macchia
Valfortore cluster.
In Figs. 7a to 7l the chronological distribution of the mapped archaeological sites is reported. It is worth to note that 1679 archaeological sites
376
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
Fig. 5 – Map of the archaeological sites for all the municipalities with more
than 100 mapped sites. A = Trivento; B = Campomarino. Archaeological
sites have been classified according to site typology of the “description”
field of the “archaeological site” shapefiles (see Material and Methods
section for detail).
(54% of the total) have been either occupied for long time or re-occupied
after a period of abandonment, so they will appear in more than one map.
During the Palaeolithic (Fig. 7a) archaeological sites were mainly located in
the north-eastern (e.g., the lower Biferno river valley) and in the south-western
(e.g. the Volturno river valley and the Venafro plain) sectors of the Molise
Region, with sparse sporadic sites in the central portion of the Region.
377
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
Fig. 6 – Density map of the archaeological sites of the Molise Region.
The same areas resulted to be occupied also during the Neolithic, together
with diffuse findings in the central portion of the Molise Region and in the
medium Biferno river valley (Fig. 7b). During the Eneolithic (Fig. 7c), the Bronze
Age (Fig. 7d) and the Iron Age (Fig. 7e), archaeological sites have been recognized only in the Biferno river valley and in the central portion of the Region.
On the opposite, they were completely lacking in the western portion of the
Region, with the only exception of few sporadic findings and of a sites cluster
in the northern sector of the study area during the Iron Age. Archaeological
sites of Samnite Age (Fig. 7f) are widespread all over the entire study area, with
only some areas in the central portion of the Region with some Samnite finds.
The same occurred during the Roman time (Fig. 7g), with Roman finds
distributed in the entire Region and mirroring the three main clusters recognized
in Fig. 1. Medieval finds are spread in the entire study area, with two main clusters in the Biferno river valley and in the central portion of the Region (Fig. 7h).
On the opposite, Post-medieval archaeological sites have been recognized only
in the Biferno valley and in the central portion of the Region, being completely
lacking in the rest of the Region (Fig. 7i). Recent archaeological finds (Fig. 7j)
are very few with a random distribution within the study area. Finally, 372 sites
(12% of the total, Fig. 7k) have an uncertain age and they have been mainly
recognized in the central-western portion of the Molise Region.
378
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
Fig. 7 – Chronological distribution of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region. White dots
indicates archaeological sites of a precise age whereas black dots indicate archaeological sites older
than the considered age.
We have also analysed site distribution as a function of the site elevation (expressed in meters above sea level) to verify if either sites distribution
moved towards higher or lower elevations during time or if any correlation
is present. In Fig. 8 we report a box plot of the site elevation as a function of
the site age. It is possible to note that the minimum site elevation is almost
constant during different period. The median values (dotted line within each
box plot of Fig. 8) highlight the occurrence of an increasing trend from the
379
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
Palaeolithic (median value around 190 m a.s.l.) to the Medieval time (median
value around 530 m a.s.l.), with a local minimum during the Eneolithic Age
(median value around 190 m a.s.l.). A decreasing trend of the site elevation has
been recognized from the Medieval to the Recent Ages (median value around
400 m a.s.l.). The same trend has been recognized for the maximum elevations
with values ranging from about 1050 m a.s.l. (during both the Paleolithic and
the Neolithic Ages) to about 1300 m a.s.l. (during the Medieval Age), with a
local minimum during the Eneolithic Age (maximum elevation around 880
m a.s.l.) and a local maximum during the Samnite Age (maximum elevation
close to 1400 m a.s.l.).
The typology of archaeological finds is shown in Fig. 9. Type groups are
those included in the “description” field of the “archaeological site” shapefiles
described in the material and methods section. Moreover, the most diffuse
site type is the archaeological finds group that includes 57,1% of the total
mapped sites followed by settlements (12,9%) and buildings (9,8%). Sacred
areas represent 5,8% of the total sites whereas buildings dealing with industrial
archaeology and funeral areas correspond to 2,6% of the total. Surrounding walls include 2,4% of the total sites, being followed by castles (1,9%),
fortifications (1,4%) and hydraulic structures (1,3%). Streets and towers are
less diffuse, both representing 0,6% of the total mapped areas. Moreover,
the “other” type group includes archaeological sites of distinct types (such
as caves, cave paintings, submarine archaeological finds and thermal baths)
that, collectively, do not exceed 1% of the total mapped sites.
Finally, we have analysed a possible correlation between site location
and some either man-made (tratturi) or natural (river) features of the landscape (Fig. 10). Archaeological sites located within 1000 m from the tratturi are reported in Fig. 10a. As tratturi appeared during the V century BC
(Mastronardi 2004), the archaeological sites from the Palaeolithic to the
Iron Age have been excluded from this analysis. This buffer includes 530
sites (19% of the 2786 sites ranging in age from the Samnite to the Recent
time), also counting 58 sites of uncertain age. All the site typologies listed in
Fig. 9 fall within this buffer. In addition, archaeological sites located within
1000 m from main rivers are reported in Fig. 10b. It includes 399 sites (13%
of the total) whose ages range from the Palaeolithic to the Recent time, also
including 45 sites of uncertain age. Again, all the site typologies listed in
Fig. 9 fall within this buffer.
4. Discussion and conclusion
The use of GIS software and database has become widespread practice
in international archaeology allowing to store and to analyse a large amount
of data (Djindjian 1998; Gillings, Wheatley 2003; Chapman 2006).
380
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
Fig. 9 – Percentage of archaeological site typology respect to the total
mapped sites.
Fig. 8 – Box plot of the site elevation (m a.s.l.) as a
function of site age.
Moreover, this study provides a powerful tool to analyse human distribution
in the Molise Region. It represents, up to now, the largest, more detailed and
well-organized GIS database of archaeological finds within the study area.
Some relevant features could be derived by the GIS analysis described in
the previous sections. First, 3111 archaeological sites represent an unexpected
and relevant number of mapped sites, widespread in the entire region, with
three main clusters located along the Biferno river valley, in the central and
in the south-western sectors of the region, respectively. Moreover, the highest
densities (expressed as site/km²) have been found in the south-western cluster.
Here, the density value of 82 archaeological sites/km² has been recognized in
381
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
correspondence of the historical centre of Isernia. This high-density value is
due to the detailed archaeological survey carried out by Amato et al. (2016)
that has been included in our database. Most of the mapped archaeological
sites have been classified as archaeological finds, whereas the most diffuse
site typologies, that reflect the occurrence of a well-organized human society,
are settlements, buildings and sacred areas.
The chronological and the elevation (expressed as meter above sea level)
distribution of archaeological sites enhance that, during the Palaeolithic to
the Iron Age time span, archaeological sites were clustered along the Biferno
valley and in the central sector of the Molise Region. In addition, they were
located at the median elevation usually not exceeding 400 m a.s.l. probably
because these areas were very close to the river network that represented the
main water source at that time. During the Samnite and Roman ages, archaeological sites are almost homogeneously distributed in the entire region. In this
period, and during the Samnite Age, humans started moving uphill, as it is
testified by the occurrence of several Samnite fortification located on top of
many ridges. This is due to the necessity to protect human settlements from
foreign invasion also considering that the highest topographic peaks led the
view to reach far distances. This tendency to protect human settlements is still
present during Medieval time, when foreign attacks were common. For these
reasons, many castles were built on the top of the ridges during Medieval to
Post-medieval times.
It must be highlighted that the archaeological sites GIS database could be
continuously upgraded with the inclusion of new data related to the collection
of new and unknown archaeological sites. It is worthy to note that, anyway,
Fig. 10 – a) White dots indicate archaeological sites located within 1000 m from the “tratturi”
(black, continuous line); b) White dots indicate archaeological sites located within 1000 m from
the main rivers. In both figures, black dots indicate archaeological sites far more than 1000 m from
the applied buffers.
382
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
the documentary research has pointed out some critical aspects. During the
analysis of the Superintendence for Archaeological Heritage archives, it was
impossible to trace the complete documentation related either to archaeological surveys carried out during the period 1970-1990 or to excavations in
course of publication. In addition, there is an anomalous lack of information
on some archaeological contexts, as evidenced by the few archaeological sites
mapped in the municipality of Campobasso. Furthermore, archaeological sites
are missing in other areas because of the lack of interest of the scientific community to carry on a systematic study. In other cases, the geomorphological
and the environmental features of the territory were not favourable to the
establishment of human settlements.
Notwithstanding the limits of data collection, the product of this research
represents an exhaustive census of archaeological sites within the Molise Region and the GIS analysis carried out within this study allowed us to recognize
some relevant features of human distribution through space and time. This
GIS database represents, up to now, the most powerful tool to promote the
knowledge of the archaeological heritage of the Molise Region worldwide
and to address urban planning in the next years.
Ettore Valente*
Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, dell’Ambiente e delle Risorse
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II
ettore.valente@unina.it
Marilena Cozzolino
Dipartimento di Scienze Umanistiche, Sociali e della Formazione
Università del Molise
marilena.cozzolino@unimol.it
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Superintendence for Archaeological Heritage of the Molise Region
that allowed us to analyse their entire archives, including historical documents. We also
wish to thank Dr. Antonella Golino and Dr. Rosa Cannavacciuolo that have participated
to the first collection of data in the frame of the Project “Conoscere per Competere”.
REFERENCES
AA.VV. 1980, Sannio: Pentri e Frentani dal VI al I sec. a.C., Catalogo della Mostra, Roma,
De Luca.
Amato V., Aucelli P.P.C., Capozzi A., De Benedittis G.F., Pappone G., Rosskopf C.M.
2013, Environmental changes in the Boiano intramontane basin (Molise, Italy) since the times of ancient Bovianum (IVth century BC), «Alpine and Mediterranean Quaternary»,
26, 1, 15-29.
* Corresponding author.
383
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
Amato V., Cozzolino M., De Benedittis G., Di Paola G., Gentile V., Giordano C.,
Marino P., Rosskopf C.M., Valente E. 2016, An integrated quantitative approach to assess the archaeological heritage in highly anthropized areas: The case study of Aesernia
(Southern Italy), «Acta Imeko», 5, 2, 33-43.
Barker G. 1995, The Biferno Valley Survey. The Archaeological and Geomorphological Record, London, Leicester University Press.
Caliò L.M., Lepone A., Lippolis E. 2011, Larinum. The development of the forum area, in F.
Colivicchi (ed.), Local Cultures of South Italy and Sicily in the Late Republican Period: Between Hellenism and Rome, «Journal of Roman Archaeology», Suppl. 83, 7A-111.
Capini S. 1990, Venafro (Isernia): il teatro romano, «Bollettino di Archeologia», 229-232.
Capini S., De Benedittis G. 2000, Pietrabbondante: guida agli scavi, Campobasso, Tipoli- tografia Fotolampo.
Catalano D., Paone N., Terzani C. 2001, Isernia, Isernia, Cosmo Iannone Editore.
Ceglia V. 1988, Lo scavo della necropoli di Vicenne, «Conoscenze», 4, 31-48.
Ceglia V. 2000, Campochiaro (CB). La necropoli di Vicenne, in E. Arslan, M. Buora (eds.)
L’oro degli Avari. Popolo delle steppe in Europa, Milano, InForm Edizioni, 212-221.
Ceglia V. 2015, Saepinum. Il sistema idrico e fognante, «Considerazioni di Storia e Archeo- logia», 8, 23-32.
Ceglia V., Marchetta I. 2012, Nuovi dati dalla necropoli di Vicenne a Campochiaro, in C.
Ebanista, M. Rotili (eds.), La trasformazione del mondo romano e le grandi migrazioni. Nuovi popoli dall’Europa settentrionale e centro-orientale alle coste del Mediterraneo. Atti del Convegno internazionale di studi (Cimitile-Santa Maria Capua Vetere 2011), Giornate sulla Tarda Antichità e il Medioevo, 4, Cimitile, Tavolario, 217-238.
Chapman H. 2006, Landscape Archaeology and GIS, Gloucestershire, Stroud.
Coarelli F., La Regina A. 1984, Abruzzo, Molise, Guide archeologiche Laterza, Roma-Bari,
Laterza.
Coltorti M., Cremaschi M., Delitala M.C., Esu D., Fornaseri M., McPherron A.,
Nicoletti M., van Otterloo R., Peretto C., Sala P., Schmidt V., Sevink J., 1982,
Reversed magnetic polarity at Isernia La Pineta, a new lower Paleolithic site in Central
Italy, «Nature», 300, 173-176.
Coltorti M., Ferand, G., Marzoli A., Peretto C., Ton That T., Voinchet P., Bahain
J.J., Minelli A., Thun Hohenstein U. 2005, New 40Ar/39Ar, stratigraphic and paleo- climatic data on the Isernia La Pineta Lower Paleolithic site, Molise, Italy, «Quaternary International», 131, 11-22.
Conventi M. 2004, Città romane di fondazione, Roma, L’Erma di Bretschneider.
De Benedittis G. 1974, Il centro sannitico di Monte Vairano presso Campobasso, in Docu- menti di antichità italiche e romane. Soprintendenza ai monumenti alle antichità e alle
belle arti del Molise, 5, Campobasso, 16-17.
De Benedittis G. 1977, Bovianum ed il suo territorio: primi appunti di topografia storica, Isernia, Laveglia Ed.
De Benedittis G. 1979, Abruzzo Molise. Guide d’Italia, Milano, Touring Club d’Italia.
De Benedittis G. 1981, Saepinum: città e territorio tra tardo Impero e basso Medioevo, «Archivio Storico per le Province Napoletane», 20, 7-30.
De Benedittis G. 1988, Monte Vairano, la casa di “LN”, Catalogo della Mostra, Campo- basso, Studio Emmezeta.
De Benedittis G. 2004, Bovianum, Aesernia, Monte Vairano: considerazioni sull’evoluzione
dell’insediamento nel Sannio pentro, in H. Jones (ed.), Samnium. Settlement and Cultural
Change, Archaeologia Transatlantica 22, Providence, Brown University, 26-28.
De Benedittis G. 2008, Molise: esperienze di survey: Riccia, Oratino, Castropignano, Isernia,
Istituto regionale per gli studi storici del Molise.
De Tata P. 1990, L’anfiteatro romano di Larinum: le campagne di scavo 1987-1988, «Cono- scenze», 6, 129-137.
384
E. Valente, M. Cozzolino
Di Niro A. 1991, Larinum, in S. Capini, A. Di Niro (eds.), Samnium. Archeologia del Molise,
Catalogo della Mostra, Roma, Quasar, 263-267.
Di Niro A., Santone M., Santoro W. 2010, Carta del Rischio Archeologico nell’area del
Cratere. Primi dati di survey nei comuni colpiti dal sisma del 2002, Campobasso, Soprintendenza per i Beni Archeologici del Molise.
Di Rocco G. 2009, Castelli e borghi murati della Contea di Molise (secoli X-XIV), Quaderni
di Archeologia Medievale 10, Firenze, All’Insegna del Giglio.
Djindjian F. 1998, GIS usage in worldwide archaeology, in P. Moscati (ed.), Methodological Trends and Future Perspectives in the Application of GIS in Archaeology, «Archeologia e Calcolatori», 9, 19-30.
Gaggiotti M., Matteini Chiari M. 1979, Sepino. Archeologia e continuità, Campobasso, Edizioni Enne.
Gillings M., Wheatley D. 2003, Spatial Technology and Archaeology. The Archaeological Applications of GIS, London, Taylor&Francis.
Grimaldi S. 2005, Nuove ricerche sul Paleolitico del Molise. Materie prime, industrie litiche, insediamenti, Isernia, Centro Europeo di Ricerche Preistoriche.
La Regina A. 2014, Pietrabbondante e il Sannio antico, «Almanacco del Molise», 161-208.
Lippolis E., Guidone S., Lepone A., Mazzilli G. 2015, Larino: ricerche nell’area del Foro, «Scienze dell’Antichità», 21, 1, 69-100.
Marazzi F., Delogu P. (eds.) 1996, San Vincenzo al Volturno: cultura, istituzioni, economia,
Monteroduni, Edizioni Cep.
Marino L., Carnevale S., Pesino C. 2003, Guida ai castelli del Molise, Pescara, CARSA
Edizioni.
Mastronardi N. 2004, I giganti verdi. Immagini, incontri e suggestioni lungo i tratturi del Molise, Cerro al Volturno, Volturnia Ed.
Mataluna S. 2012, Il territorio tra Allifae e Venafrum, in Quilici, Quilici 2011, 11-128.
Matteini Chiari M., Gaggiotti M., De Benedettis G. 1984, Saepinum-Sepino, Campo- basso, Edizioni Enne.
Meini M., Di Felice G., Petrella M. 2018, Geotourism perspectives for transhumance routes. Analysis, requalification and virtual tools for the geoconservation management
of the drove roads in Southern Italy, «Geosciences», 8, 10, 368.
Minelli A., Peretto C. 2006, Preistoria in Molise. Gli insediamenti del territorio di Isernia, Roma, Aracne Editrice.
Minotti M., Giancola C., Di Marzio P., Di Martino P. 2018, Land use dynamics of drove roads: The case of tratturo Castel di Sangro-Lucera (Molise, Italy), «Land», 7, 3.
Morel J.P. 1984, Il santuario sannitico di Vastogirardi. Resoconto degli scavi archeologici degli anni 1971, 1973 e 1974, in Sannio: Pentri e Frentani dal VI al I secolo a.C. Atti
del Convegno (Isernia 1980), Campobasso, Enne.
Oakley S.P. 1995, The Hill-forts of the Samnites, Rome, Archaeological Monographs of the British School of Rome.
Pagano M., Ceccarelli A., D’Andrea A. 2005, La ripresa delle esplorazioni e degli scavi nel santuario italico di Vastogirardi (IS), in D. Caiazza (ed.), Italica ars. Studi in onore di
Giovanni Colonna per il premio I Sanniti, Piedimonte Matese, Grillo, 451-505.
Paone N., Schioppa A., Marazzi F., Vignone F., Speciale L., De Luca Roberti L., Shaw
A. 2004, San Vincenzo al Volturno, Isernia, Cosmo Iannone Editore.
Pellicano A. 2007, Geografia e storia dei tratturi del Mezzogiorno, Roma, Aracne.
Peretto C. 2013, Isernia La Pineta, Isernia, Cosmo Iannone Editore.
Quilici L., Quilici Gigli S. 2011, Carta Archeologica e ricerche in Campania. Fascicolo 5:
Comune di Venafro, Roma, Atlante Tematico di Topografia Antica, Suppl. XV.
Rufo E. 2011, Note sulla preistoria dell’Alta Valle del Volturno, in A. Testa (ed.), L’abbazia
di San Vincenzo e l’alta valle del Volturno, «ArcheoMolise», 3, 8, 8-17.
385
GIS mapping of the archaeological sites in the Molise Region (Italy)
Rufo E., Minelli A., Lembo G., Paglione B., Peretto C. 2010, La preistoria dell’alto Molise.
Una panoramica, «ArcheoMolise», 2, 4, 6-19.
Santorelli S. 2013, Trivento, testimonianze dal passato, «Archeomolise», 14, 22-35.
Sardella B. 2011, Fra Terventum e Aufidene. Carta archeologica dei territori montani del Sannio Pentro nord-occidentale, Tesi di Dottorato, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli.
Stek T.D. 2010, Cult Places and Cultural Change in Republican Italy, Amsterdam, Amsterdam
University Press.
Stek T.D., Modrall E.B., Kalkers R.A.A., van Otterloo R.H., Sevink J. 2015, An early
Roman colonial landscape in the Apennine mountains: Landscape archaeological research in the territory of Aesernia (Central-Southern Italy), «Analysis Archaeologica»,
1, 229-291.
Terzani C. 2005, Scavo archeologico della cinta muraria di Aesernia, «FOLD&R. Fasti On
Line Documents & Research», 35, 1-2.
Zilli I. 2010, Atlante delle emergenze culturali del Molise. Risultati, riflessioni ed implicazioni
di un primo censimento, Campobasso, Palladino Editore.
ABSTRACT
The Molise Region, on the Adriatic coast of southern Italy, experienced human presence
since prehistoric times. Site distribution is not homogeneous throughout the region and a com- prehensive census of all known archaeological sites has never been performed. In this paper,
we present the results of a three-year project for the GIS mapping and database creation for
all the known archaeological sites of the Molise Region. As a result, 3111 archaeological sites
have been mapped, stored in a GIS database and then analysed through Spatial Analyst tools.
Most of the mapped sites have been classified as area of archaeological finds (57.1% of the
total sites), followed by settlements (12.9%) and buildings (9.8%). Site distribution is mainly
clustered along the Biferno river valley, in the central and in the south-western sectors of the
Molise Region. The largest human occupation of the region occurred during the Samnite and
Roman ages. Archaeological sites are also located at different elevation a.s.l., with a general
increasing trend of site elevation through time. This GIS database is, up to now, the most
complete census of archaeological sites in the study area, thus representing a powerful tool
to promote the archaeological heritage of the Molise Region and to address urban planning.
